The method of solution will not be determinants. Determinants are something that will come later. The method will use is called elimination. And elimination, well, if it succeeds, it gets the answer. And normally it does succeed. If the matrix A that's coming into that system is a good matrix, then elimination will work, we'll get the answer in an efficient way. But why don't we, as long as we're sort of seeing how elimination works, it's OK.
The idea of elimination is, you would have thought of it. I mean, Gauss Thought of it before we did, but only because he was born earlier. It's a natural idea. And then, and you've seen the idea. But now, the part that I want to show you is elimination expressed in matrix language, because the whole course, all the key ideas get expressed as matrix operations, not as words. And one of the operations, of course, that we'll meet is how do we multiply matrices and why?
There's the matrix, the three by three matrix. Everything is in that matrix, but behind it is those equations. So this is the system, AX equal B, you could say. This is our system to solve,AX equal. And the right hand side is that vector, 2122. Okay. Now, when I describe elimination, it gets to be a pain to keep writing the equal signs and the pluses and so on, it's that matrix that totally matters. So our purpose is to knock out the X part of equation 2.
So what, first of all, this is the key number, right, that I'm starting with. And that's called the pivot. And again, I'll do it with this matrix because I can do it short. What's the multiplier here? What do I multiply? Equation 1 and subtract. Notice I'm saying that word subtract. I'd like to stick to that convention. And now finally, let me ask you what the multiplier is. Yes? 3 times that first equation will knock out X.
 MATLAB finishes up with the left side before, and then just goes back to do the right side. So I just, like, I'm leaving a column room for a column of B, the right hand side, but I'll fill it in later. Okay. that 3. that will leave, will make that 0. That was our purpose. 3, 2 is away from the 8. We'll leave a 2. And 3, 1 is away. from 1. And this guy didn't change.
 MATLAB would have to look at this number and do that step unless you told it in advance that it was 0. The next step is really the 3, 1 step, row 3, column 1. But of course, I already have 0. Okay, so the multiplier is 0. I take 0 of this equation away from this one, and I'm all set. Now we can see the second pivot, which is what? The second pivot is now gone from this equation, right? We're down to two equations in Y.
So this is still the first pivot. Now the second pivot is this guy who has appeared there, and what's the multiplier, the appropriate multiplier now? And what's my purpose is to clean up, is to wipe out, the 3, 2 position, right? This was the 2, 1 step. And now I'm going to take the3, 2 step. So this all stays the same. And so now I just do it again, like everything's recursive. This is such a basic algorithm and you've seen it. But carry me through one last step.
The elimination step from A, this matrix I'm going to call U. U for upper triangular. So the whole purpose of elimination was to get from A to U. And literally that's the most common calculation in scientific computing. And any, and people think of how could I do that faster because it's a major, major thing. But we're doing it the straightforward way. We found 3 pivots. Is there, I think that, oh, did I just invent a negative 1? I'm sorry that the tape can't correct that.
"I didn't have to do anything special. I just followed the rules. And, and the pivots are 1, 2, and 5. By the way, just because I always anticipate stuff from a later day, if I wanted to know the determinant of the, theeterminant of this matrix, which I never do want to know. But I would just multiply the pivotots, the determinants is 10." "I would have done it a different way. I would have come up with 3 pivots"
If there's a 0 in the pivot position, maybe I can say that, I would try to exchange for a lower equation and get a, get a proper pivot up there. Now, for example, this second pivot came out 2. Could it have come out 0? What, actually, if I change that 8 a little bit,. I would have got, again, a, a,. a, little trouble. What, what should I change. that 8 to so that I get some, so that we run into trouble? A 6.
If this was a 6, I would survive by a row exchange. Now, of course, it might have happened that I couldn't do the row, that, that there was zeros below it, but here there wasn't. I could also have got in trouble if this number 1 was a little different. See, that 1 became a 5, I guess, by the end. So, do you, can you see what number there would have got me trouble that I really couldn't get out of?
If zero is in the pivot position, and I can't, I've got no place to exchange. So, there, there must be some number, which if I had had here, it would have meant failure. Negative 4, good. If it was a negative 4 here, if it happened to be anegative 4, I'll temporarily put it up here. Of course, the inverse of a matrix is coming next week, but you've heard these words before. The matrix would have not been invertible.
The augmented matrix is a way of adding an extra column to an equation. It's a way to get out of a row exchange and, and get out, or there's complete failure when we get a zero, and there's nothing below that we can use. So, what would MATLAB do? And what should we do? Let's, let me bring in the right hand side as an extracolumn. This is, I, I would call this the augmented matrix. Augment means you've tacked something on. I've tacking on this extra column.
So, this is like the augmented, no, damn, circle the wrong thing. Okay, so what happened to that extra column, the right hand side of the equations, when I did the first step? So, that was three of this away from this, so it took the two stayed the same, but three two's got taken away from 12, leaving six, and that two staying the same. So, now I'm. this is still like forward elimination. I got to this point, which I think is right. And now what did I do with this step? I multiplied that pivot by
So, I think I take two sixes, which is 12 away from the two. two, or that whole equation by two, and subtracted from that. Do you think minus 10 is my final right hand side, theright hand side that goes with you, and let me call that once and forever, the vector C. So, C is what happens to be, and U is what happening to A. Okay, there you've seen elimination. Clean, okay. Oh, what's back substitution? So, so what are my final equations then? Can I, can I copy these equations? X plus two Y plus Z equals two is still there, and two Y minus two Z equals six is there.
So, if Z is negative two, that's four there, is that right? And so, two Y plus the four is six, maybe Y is one. We're doing it on the fly, because it's so easy. And then X is, so X, two Ys is two minus two, maybe X is two. So, you see what back substitution is. It's the simple step solving the equations in reverse order, because the system is triangular. Okay, now what do I, what, so that, that like is first piece of the lecture. What's the second piece?
"I want to write the operations that I did in matrices. Right? I've carried the matrices along, but I haven't said the operation, those elimination steps, I now want to express as matrices," he says. "Let me, let me move the board up for that. Because when we do matrix operations, we got to like be able to see the big picture. Okay, here they come. So, now this is elimination matrices." "I'm remembering a point I want to single out as ... especially important," he adds.
Do you remember how I look at that matrix multiplication? The result of multiplying a matrix by some vector is a combination of the columns of the matrix. If I have some matrix there, and I multiply it by three, four, five, let's say. Okay, I'm going to come back to that multiple times. What I wanted to do now was to emphasize the parallel thing with rows. Why? Because all our operations here for this, like this two weeks of the course, are row operations.
The central idea of linear algebra is how these matrices work by rows as well as by columns. So this is a, that's a row vector. It's a one by three matrix. What's the product of a row times a matrix? And okay, it's aRow. A column, sorry, a matrix times a column is a column. So matrix times, yeah, Matrix times a Column is a Column. And we know what column is. And then we'll say how matrix multiplication works and we'll see that it's true.
The answer is one of that first row. So it's one times, one times row one plus two times row two plus seven times row three. As we do matrix multiplication, keep your eye on what it's doing with whole vectors. We have a combination, a linear combination of the rows. That's what I want to do. So I'm going to be a matrix that's going to subtract three times, times row 1 from row two. And leaves the other rows the same.
So what matrix will do it? It's these, it should be a pretty simple matrix, because we're doing a very simple step. We're just doing this step that changes row two. So actually row one is not changing. So tell me how the matrix should begin. So the first row of the matrix will be one zero zero, because that's just the right thing that takes one of that row and none of the other rows, and that's what we want. That's great.
If I put in 0, 1, 0, that would be, that's the matrix. What's the name of that matrix? The identity matrix, right? So it does absolutely nothing. It just multiplies everything and leaves it where it is. It's like a 1, like the number 1, for matrices. But that's not what we want, because we want to change this row two. So what's that row, what's the right matrix, the identity matrix?
The good matrix is the matrix that takes minus 3 of row 1 plus the row 2 and gives the new row 2. So we got various ways to multiply matrices now. We sort of like informally. finish that matrix for me? Negative 3 goes here. And what goes here, that 1, and what went here, the 0? That's the good matrix. We've got a new way of multiplying matrices, and we're going to use it a lot more in the future.
"I want to express the whole elimination process in matrix language," he says. "So this guy is our elementary matrix. Let's call it E for elementary or elimination. And let me put the indexes to one because it's the matrix that we needed to fix the two one position" "We've got, well, we will have by columns, by rows, by each entry at a time. But it's good to see that matrix multiplication when one of the matrices is so simple," he adds.
E for elementary or elimination matrix. And what's the index number that I used to tell me what E32, right? Because it's fixing this three to position. and a four below it, so I subtracted two times row two from row three. Tell me the matrix that'll do that. And tell me its name. Okay, you remember, so E32 is supposed to multiply my guy that I have. And it's supposed to produce the right result, which was it leaves, supposed to leave the first row.
The key number is this minus the multiplier that goes sitting there in that three to position. see, I subtract two times, so what's this row? What's this here? 0, right? Because the first row is not involved. So that I, the overall effect is to take minus two of this row plus one of that. So now what? Now the next point in the lecture is to put those steps together into a matrix that does it all, and see how it all happens.
 matrix multiplication. We multiplied that result by e three to. And that led us to this thing, and what was that matrix? You. You see why I like matrix notation? Because there in like little space, a few bits when it's compressed on the web is everything is this whole lecture. Okay. Now, there are. there are important facts about matrix multiplication, and we're close to maybe the most important. That is this. How could I, how would I create the matrix that does the whole job at once that.
If I keep the matrices in order, I can't mess around with the order. But I can change the order that I do the multiplications. I can multiply these two first. In other words, you see what those parentheses are doing? It's saying do multiply the E's first. And that gives you the matrix that does everything at once. Okay. So this fact that this is automatically the same as this. does all of elimination in one shot? It would be, I would just put these together, right?
There's a single matrix. I could call it E. matrices that that you can move the parentheses. It's the called the associative law. I think you can now forget that. But don't forget the law. Because actually we'll see so many steps in linear algebra. So many proofs, even, of main fact come from just moving the brackets. And it's not that easy to prove that this is correct. You have to go into the gory details of matrix multiplication.
It's the matrix that exchanges two rows. It's a called a permutation matrix. So exchange rows one and two just to make life easy. So if I had my matrix, let me just do two by two, ABCD. So I better take one of it. So actually, I've just the easy way. This is my matrix. And we'll, yeah. might need it. We didn't need it in this case. But it's the Matrix that exchangesTwo rows. And just like tell me what that would be.
Columns have hardly got into today's lecture, but they certainly are going to be around. How could I, if I started with this matrix, ABCD, then I wouldn't, I'm not even going to write this down. Because in elimination, we're doing rows. But suppose we wanted to exchange the columns of a matrix. How would I do that? What matrix multiplication would do that job? Actually, why not? I'll write it down. So this is like just, I'll writing it under here and then hide it.
When I multiply on the left, I'm doing row operations. So if I want to do a column operation, where do I put that permutation matrix on the right? I put it here, where I just barely left room for it. So I'll exchange the two columns of the identity. Then it comes out right. Because now I'm multiplying a column at a time. This is the first column and says, take none of that column, one of this one, and then you got. again.
You can't exchange the orders of matrices. A times B is not the same as B times A. You have to keep these matrices in their gals given order here. But you can move the parentheses. So in other words, the commutative law, which would allow you to take it in the other order, is false. Okay. So what next? I could do this multiplication. I couldDo E3,2. So let me come back to see what else I can do.
Inverse, I'll use the word inverse here. All the matrices you've seen on this board have inverses. I didn't write any bad matrices down. We spoke about possible failure and for a moment we put in a matrix that would fail. But right now all these matrices are good. So reversing steps is going to come in. So let me make the first step at what's the inverse matrix? The inverse matrix is the matrix that does elimination. If I do that multiplication, there's a better way to do this. And so in this last few minutes of today's lecture can I anticipate that better way?
Inverses are all invertible. Let's take the inverse, well let me say first what does the inverse mean and find it. So what matrix will get me back? What matrix will bring back, you know, if I started with a 2 12 2 and it changed to a 2 6 2 because of this guy? I want to find the matrix which undoes elimination. The matrix which multiplies this to give the. Inverses. They're all inverts.
The inverse matrix in this case is I now want to add 3 times row 1 to row 2. That's a case where the inverse is clear. It's clear in words what to do because what this did was simple to express. It just changed row 2 by subtracting 3 of row 1. So to invert it I go that way. And if we do that calculation 3 times this row plus 1 times thisRow comes out the right row of the identity. So if this matrix was E and this matrix is I for identity. identity.
So say a Monday. identity then what's the notation for this guy E to the minus 1, E inverse. Let's stop there for today. That's a little jump on what's coming on Monday. We'll be back next week with a look at what we've learned so far this week. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from."We've been here before. We've got a story to tell. We're going to tell it," says CNN's John Sutter. "It's time to get to work."